Hi I'm Matt from eSpares.
In this video, I’m going to show you how
a microwave oven works.
So what are microwaves?
They’re just a form of energy that move
in a wave-like way, much like visible light.
Lets have a look at the electromagnetic spectrum.
Here’s visible light, right in the middle.
And as we move this way along the spectrum,
the wavelength gets longer.
And our microwaves are here, between IR and
radio-waves.
Now the microwaves that are produced by our
ordinary microwave oven are of just the right
wavelength to be absorbed by water and foods
like potatoes are full of water.
Now imagine for a second that this isn’t
a potato but is in fact a water molecule.
It’s polar.
Which means it’s positively charged on one
side and negatively charged on the other.
As the microwave passes by, the water molecules
vibrates to stay aligned with the oscillation
from the wave.
And it’s this vibration that causes heat.
Now contrary to popular belief, microwaves
don’t heat foods from the inside out.
The microwaves still penetrate the outer part
of the food first, which is why you’ll see
on cooking instructions it often tells you
to leave the food to stand for a little while,
and that allows the heat to penetrate evenly
throughout the food.
Microwaves don’t heat up plastics, glass,
or ceramics.
That’s because their molecules are not polar.
If the bowl does get hot, it’s through conduction
of heat from the food itself.
And im sure you know never to put metal objects
inside the microwave.
That’s because many metals reflect microwaves,
and you get that ‘arcing’ or sparking.
And that’s actually dangerous and can cause
damage to the microwave oven.
So, let’s open ours up.
Now I’m doing something we recommend you
don’t do.
You shouldn’t ever take off the outer casing
of your microwave, like I’m doing.
It should only ever be done by a qualified
appliance engineer.
We’ve got high voltages inside and it can
be potentially quite dangerous.
But I’m doing that so I can show you the
flow of the electrical current through the
microwave, obviously I’m unplugged from
the mains.
So it comes in here into this little board
here where we’ve got a fuse and a little
filter and that just cleans any noise from
the electrical signal.
It comes across here to this which is a thermal
cut out switch.
Just means if everything is getting too hot
inside it will cut the power before things
start to catch fire.
It then comes down to a little micro-switch,
which if I then open and close the door, hopefully
you can see that, its cutting the current
to stop the microwaves when the door is open.
That also comes up to a bulb here, so we can
see what we are doing inside, and down to
our main control board here.
Now the control board is obviously where we
set the power level and duration that we want
to cook for.
From there it comes down to this big lump
at the bottom here which is a transformer,
and that’s just jumping the voltage up from
ordinary 240 volt mains electricity, up to
several thousand volts; it depends on what
make and model of microwave that you’ve
got.
But we need that really high voltage to power
this part which is called the magnetron.
And the magnetron is what actually produces
the microwaves.
They are filtered through this part here,
channelled through this, which is called the
wave guide and out into the cavity of the
microwave.
Now there’s a cover on this called the wave
guide cover, it can be either a plastic one
like this, or you might find that you have
this slightly metallic card.
And it’s just to stop any food getting inside
the wave guide and into the magnetron; because
you don’t want that to happen.
But it’s one of the few parts that’s easily
replaceable on a microwave.
Now there’s just a couple of motors I want
to show you.
There’s a motor here that’s driving this
fan.
That’s just to draw ambient air across the
magnetron, stopping it getting too hot.
That comes past the bulb and across the cavity
and then vents out this side of the microwave.
Now the other motor is right in the middle
underneath here.
And that’s just what turns the plate round
whist the microwave is on and the food is
cooking.
And the plate is very often broken.
It’s the most commonly replaced spare part
on a microwave.
So hopefully you now know how a microwave
works.
Wave guide covers and microwave plates, and
other spare parts for microwaves are available
for all makes and models.
And you can find them on the eSpares website.
Thanks for watching.